# Distributed Ownership

A planned economy is a bad economy.

Large-scale economies are complex things.  They are complex to a degree only properly understood by certain experts in particular fields of study whose entire purposes are the intricacies and surprises of unmanageable complexity -- things so complex that a defining characteristic of them is that they regularly surprise people.  Most relevant is the study of "complex systems", a technical term that means a lot more than just "Will this collection of moving parts work as expected?"  An automobile design in a computer is not a "complex system" in this sense, but things like climates, economies, and ecosystems, and something the study of complex systems is that people who think they understand those systems well enough to deterministically alter them are simply plagued by unwarranted arrogance.

Even those experts are not what people might think experts should be in those fields.  They are not people who can tell you "if A, then B" about how to manage that complexity.  They are people who can give you broad predictions that are slightly less prone to error than others, at least sometimes, but that is only a side-effect, and such predictions are generally only less prone to error because these experts have learned to think less optimistically, and to consider more variables and less direct effects than most people who have a difficult time seeing past their noses.  Such experts might play with mathematical models, but in the end those models are largely wishful thinking.

Large-scale economies are complex systems, because they do not really have rules, per se.  The "rules" that exist in how large-scale economies operate are actually rules that apply to discrete, decision-making entities, or "agents" in economic terms (entities with economic agency).  In short, every single motherfucking person in an economy has a set of rules governing interactions with other agents.  The rules differ between interactions with other specific agents, interactions with different numbers of other agents, interactions with groups of agents the individual thinks of as a single collective agent, and interactions on Tuesday as opposed to Monday, and even interactions during a fresh start in the morning and the dragging brain-drain of late afternoon.

The rules for interaction with other agents may differ while the individual listens to a Perturbator album (yes, there is a pun in that choice of band's name that applies later in this wall of text).

The complex system of the large-scale economy is the emergent economic conditions of uncountable interactions between those individual agents across the entire economy.  Weird effects arise from the aggregation of individual interactions, and those effects in turn continue to affect the changing "rules" of interaction that apply to every individual agent they touch.  There is one rule of thumb for large-scale economies as a whole, though, that appears to apply more and more as the economy gets bigger and bigger, and can help people plan for the future a bit:

***Economies tend to seek equilibrium.***

Of course, modern economic "managers" (e.g. the US Federal Reserve board) are focused on achieving political ends, and try to do so by manipulating the economy they are tasked to manage.  Such management almost always focuses quite heavily on maintaining some level of constant growth as measured by specific, simplistic metrics.  Unfortunately for them, there are some problems with this approach.  For instance, simplistic metrics become a game that one tries to beat, always seeking high scores, and the way to get those high scores is often to address things that do not actually make for a healthier economy.  Another example is that endless growth is not consistent with a system that seeks equilibrium; it is like trying to pile water higher without letting it spill over the edge of the bucket.  Good luck with that.

The practical effect of economies tending to seek equilibrium, and more so as they get bigger and more complex, is that the farther from equilibrium they get the more pressure they exert back toward equilibrium.  When that pressure overcomes the pressure exerted by human will to try to push away from equilibrium, it "snaps" back like a rubber band, shooting past the equilibrium point, then rebounding back in the original direction, and so on.  It oscillates in ever-shrinking distances from the centerline until it reaches the level of "normal" economic perturbations, like a constant, relatively low-grade vibration around the equilibrium point.

In the short term, market corrections (the "snap back" action) tend to cause damage to the overall health of the economy and, thanks to the way people game the system, efforts to force growth tend to only *look* very positive.  In the long term, the resulting "business cycle" (a term for you to look up, if you want more detail) does significant harm to the ability of humanity to advance its conditions over time.  Sometimes people blame "capitalism", sometimes "socialism", and sometimes just bad luck, but often it is just *any* kind of attempt to game an entire economy that causes the most harm.  Playing with fire is especially dangerous when you do not understand how it works, such as when you think you can put out the gasoline fire in an emergency by pouring water on it.

One of the most philosophically pervasive attempts to dictate how economies should work is the "Marxian" theory of economic justice (which is somewhat distinct from, but inspirational to, communism, marxism, socialism, and their relatives, though some adherents of some of these ideologies would argue the point; I can't please everyone), in which the means of prodution are distributed to the workers who directly employ them.  People with belief systems based on this notion of economic justice think public policy should be reformed to explicitly grant "ownership" (in some sense of the term) for all "capital goods" (means of production) to the workers who engage in the direct labor of production.  If they had their way, wrenches, hammers, lathes, CNC routers, forges, mold injectors, and so on, would all be "owned" in some sense (perhaps collectively, in groups) by the people who actually operate them, and anyone who designed and built such a thing then wanted someone else to use it would have to give the thing to that worker.  A worker who cannot take the tool provided and walk away with it to work independently or for someone else, with no cost involved in taking it, is a "wage slave" in the language of many.

Luckily, for the people who believe control of the means of production should be as widely distributed as possible, in to the hands of people using them, progress is being made.  We are fast approaching a world with maximally distributed control of the means of production, and I like that idea, given the way it is happening.  Key to my appreciation is the fact it is not the way the "Marxian" ideologues say they want it to happen.  The difference is simple:

* I mean "distributed" in the same way Bitcoin, Fossil SCM, and other network
  distributed technologies are "distributed"; in a descriptive sense of the
  term, like referring to how leaves fall semi-randomly around a tree in
  autumn.

* They mean "distributed" in the same way resources in a command economy are
  "distributed"; in an active, forcible sense of the term, like referring to
  how a football team lost in the mountains distributes the meat from a killed
  teammate to other starving teammates.

When taking a top-down organizational approach to distributing things, or any other approach that involves creating economic management rules, the result would probably be disastrous in the long run.  If we assume wild success in the distribution of the means of production starting in the time of Karl Marx, we could all have our own complete toolkits for some field of productive expertise.  We could also still be riding horses, hand-manufacturing paper, and sending messages via other people's horses (or just travelling for days to speak directly to an intended message recipient).

Perhaps we would be living in a world with far greater personal privacy.  We would also be living in a world where many types of concentrated co-operation just do not happen.

Instead, we live in a world where other types of concentrated co-operation just do not happen, where communication is far more advanced, but far less private and free.

Ideally, we would have no economic managers, and would probably have the best of both worlds, but that obviously did not happen.  As the means of production (increasingly science-fictional, by the stanards of my youth, including 3D printing and computers that fit in a backpack suitable to 3D manufacturing design, as well as software development for the most amazing communication apparatus and virtual world known to history) get more compact, cheaper, and easily acquired by random people off the street, and as the skills to use these tools become ever-more available over the Internet for anyone to learn, we all become more enfranchised economic agents.  We acquire the power to build the tools to take control of our own lives, our privacy and rights, in our own hands; to help others and, by network effects, help ourselves; and to subvert the (sometimes well-intentioned, but always dangerous) machinations of aspiring economic planners.

I am using a laptop several years old to write this.  With some education you and I get from the internet for free, if we sought diligently enough, we could build tools of high-privacy, low-risk, decentralized economic exchange.  Some people are already doing so, for fun and idealism, in their spare time, and I am working in other areas to achieve goals similarly important (to me, and some others like me, at least).  As these tools of production become more and more accessible and affordable, that kind of activity will only become more prevalent, and restrictions on our private lives will erode.

I believe this would happen regardless of which economic management ideology became ascendant, because complex systems tend to seek equilibrium, at least within particular constraints; if they did not seek equilibrium, they would collapse under their own complexity.  I also believe that, in a saner world without economic management trying to push things out of equilibrium along ideological lines, this would have happened much faster.  In any case, it is happening now, and I think it is likely to keep happening.

That is assuming someone does not find a way to stop it.  It is always possible that, in our lifetimes, we may never see the ultimate promise of this trend toward the individualization and decentralization of economic power.  It also is possible we may wipe ourselves out, where by "we" I mostly mean people who still possess too much power over others and do not want to lose it, and by "ourselves" I mean all of humanity.

If we, as a small but significant percentage of the species, decide it is important to live free, I think we can make it happen in a surprisingly short period of time.  The cynic in me is fully aware even well-meaning people who think they like freedom are unlikely to do anything to help, though, and may even act to hinder such efforts.  Ideological partisanship and apathetic comfort-seeking usually trump all other concerns, after all.

---

raw file in [misc](https://fossrec.com/u/apotheon/essays/index.cgi/dir?ci=trunk&name=misc)
